3/3/2024

Dear all,

For whatever it is worth, I give here examples of my experience so far
that may be useful:

20180916/DATA/Q00 has multiple stations near the nodal plane (white on
sisaz.pdf). The FDSN stations agree with the predictions, so I trust
sisaz.pdf. FUNA is UP (small) after consulting sisaz.pdf, while P0008
is DOWN, XMAS is UP (this is only clear on the unfiltered seismogram),
DZM is unclear and I skipped it.

20180916/DATA/Q01 - Here the danger is the larger signal following the
small onset after 4s: stf.pdf shows a sudden stop at 4s so I guess
this is what source people call the stopping phase (see paper by
Brustle and Muller,1987), which is *not* the one to pick (as the AIC
pick did in, for example, P0018). However, the stopping phase polarity
should be the opposite of the onset's polarity, and this is very
useful information. The time difference between the two on the
seismogram will depend on the rupture length and station azimuth and
is generally not 4s. Note the almost invisible first second on the
stf, which is likely to cause mispicks, so I assign a 1 sec error to
all when calling rdapf2.  For the weak onset, XMAS agrees with
predicted polarity, but JOHN does not, like WAKE it has an
upswing. Here I trust only the predictions at the centre of the
blue/red areas. For example, PPTF seems to have an UP onset, but is
predicted to be down. Nearby P0025 also has a weak upswing identified
by F, one could accept that but give it a 1 sec uncertainty (editing
the add_to file). I rejected P0021 as too ambiguous: a downswing on
the high-pass that is invisible on the unfiltered record except for
the AIC algorithm. In P0015,16,17 I hesitate to pick an onset but this
is up for debate, as the small onset seems identical in all three.
The stopping phase is weaker than the onset in the stations closest to
the event (MSVF,P0008) where there is a high amplitude oscillating
wave of duration 3-4s following the onset.

20180810/DATA/Q02: This is one of those magnitude 5 events from
Tonga/Kermadec that often pose lots of problems. AIC picks a
questionable onset at 43.1s in P0006, but the standard window created
by doppk does not allow to judge the pre-Pn noise. In such case I
create a second terminal window to view that noise, which shows onset
should be readable.  In P0006 pPn arrives near predicted time, but Pn
is about 4s early if F is correct.  I suspect it arrives even 1 sec
earlier than F, with a downswing as it does in P0007 which shows no
fast mantle. The P onset in HNR may about where Pn is predicted but
here there are many similar swings before P so I reject it.

20190612/DATA/Q00: shallow events, even close and magnitude 5 may be
difficult to pick. This event is an example that I reject out of hand
as being too unreliable to pick, even though AIC detected something.

Other advice:

If there are no (or no pickable) FDSN data, reject the event if fewer
than 3 Mermaids recorded the event, since for the inversion I will
only accept events with at least 3 picks (to allow for the origin time
to be adjusted). This is only the case for the weaker events, of which
the hypocentre may not be very reliable anyway.

If pre-P noise has the same character as the coda signal after P, pick
only if the P onset is clear and unambiguous.

Be careful with polarity comparisons: - check if the FDSN stations
satisfy the blue/red prediction - small P wave arrivals may have the
opposite polarity of the noise peak that carries them, check if
similar little wiggles exist elsewhere and if so, reject because the
wiggle may not be the P wave arrival.

If you pick the onset from the (top) high-passed record, SAC will not
save the pick (A) in the header, I have not yet found out how to fix
that, I guess it can be done using 'blackboard' variables. However,
this is just annoying, nothing serious.

The subdivision of records into some 3000 subdirectories (Qnn
directories on the same date) was done automatically, and has
occasionally dumped records in different directories that should be
combined. This happened whenever there were ambiguities in the event
(I suspect related to the fact that data from different groups came in
piece-wise). For example, November 30, 2020, has 20201130/DATA/Q00 to
Q05, but those are only two different events, very close in time but
one in Tonga and one in Japan. You may need to recombine records using
common sense, but it may be ambiguous which event it really was. In
that case simply reject.

I wrote a handy script <dopick> that you can run from the home
directory to do not only the picking but also the post-processing with
rdapf2. It allows you to repeat the picking once. I find that often
useful, because one learns about the event during picking, and may
wish to revise or add pick. The repeat also allows you to call rdap2
with a bias (in case you decide to ignore a small foreshock).  One
calls it from the home directory with the event directory as argument,
e.g.:

dopick 20180823/DATA/Q00

Also, I added SAC’s ‘quit’ command to mkdoppk, so you don not have to
type that yourself.

Best wishes,

Guust

